Proposing `package:typed_sql` (#272)
google/dart-neats: typed_sql/doc/03_writing_queries.md

auto-completion to tell you what extension methods are available for the
`Expr` object you are currently working with.

However, you might still need to know that `literal<T>(value)` is used to
inject Dart values into the SQL expressions as parameters.

## Projections with `.select`
While we build expressions in `.where` to filter rows from a table
(or subquery), we can use `.select` to return a set of expressions for each row
in a table (or subquery). In the simplest form this is useful if we want our
query to only return some fields, instead of returning the entire row.
But this can also be used to return any expression we can build, including
subqueries.

If in SQL we wanted to get the title, stock and a boolean indicating if
`stock > 3` from the books table, we could write an SQL query as follows:

```sql
SELECT
  title,
  stock,
  stock > 3
FROM books;
```

We can build the same query using `package:typed_sql` as follows:

```dart bookstore_test.dart#books-select-title-stock
final result = await db.books
    .select((b) => (
          b.title,
          b.stock,
          b.stock > literal(3),
        ))
    // .select() returns Query<(Expr<String>, Expr<int>, Expr<bool>)>,

>     .fetch();

Author: I don't object to this, but the change needs to be made in `bookstore_test.dart` and rolled in with `tool/update_doc_examples.dart`.

I think I opted not to do this, because our lints would need to be ignored, but that's perhaps reasonable for examples used in documentation.

    .select((title, stock) => (title,))
    // Remove null rows, we cannot do type promotion so the result is still
    // a Query<(Expr<String?>,)>
    .where((title) => title.isNotNull())
    // But we can use .orElse to callback to '', which gives us an
    // Query<(Expr<String>,)>, not that there is anything wrong with
    // returning a nullable expression.
    .select((title) => (title.orElse(literal('')),))
    .fetch();

check(titles).unorderedEquals([
  'Are Bunnies Unhealthy?',
  'Hiding Eggs for dummies',
  'Vegetarian Dining',
]);
```

While the SQL rendering code in `package:typed_sql` employs pattern matching
to render common query patterns efficient, it's likely that example above would
result in an SQL query along the lines of:

```sql
SELECT
  COALESCE(title, '')
FROM (
  SELECT
    title
  FROM (
    SELECT
      title
    FROM (
      SELECT
        *
      FROM (
        SELECT
          title,
          stock
        FROM books
      )
      WHERE stock > 3
    )
  )
  WHERE title IS NOT NULL
)
```

However, most databases have a relational query optimizer that'll make most of
the nested queries in the SQL above melt away. In practice, it's likely that,

> while above query looks scary, it's probably largely as efficient as:

Author: What the query optimizer can and cannot optimize is not something I'm bold enough to make claims about unless those claims are prefixed with appropriate qualifiers like **"probably"** :see_no_evil: 

But I agree, we could drop "largely" here.

```suggestion
while above query looks scary, it's probably as efficient as:
```

Similar to SQL we can use `.orderBy` to sort rows with an `ORDER BY` clause.
The `.orderBy` methods takes a callback that returns a list of
`(Expr<Comparable>, Order)`, this allows ordering by multiple keys.
The following example demonstrates how to sort books by stock in descending
order:

```dart bookstore_test.dart#query-orderby
final result = await db.books
    .orderBy((b) => [(b.stock, Order.descending)])
    .select((b) => (b.title, b.stock))
    .fetch();

check(result).deepEquals([
  // title, stock
  ('Vegetarian Dining', 42),
  ('Hiding Eggs for dummies', 12),
  ('Are Bunnies Unhealthy?', 10),
  ('Vegan Dining', 3),
  ('Cooking with Chocolate Eggs', 0),
]);
```

The equivalent SQL query would look something like:
```sql
SELECT
  title,
  stock
FROM books
ORDER BY stock DESC
LIMIT 3;
```

You must always provide `Order.ascending` or `Order.descending` for entries in
the return value from the callback in `.orderBy`. You can sort by any
`Expr<Comparable>`, typically `Expr<int>`, `Expr<double>`, `Expr<DateTime>`,
`Expr<String>`, or, `Expr<bool>`. Again, you can sort by expressions other than
just fields, including subqueries, but you might want to consider the

> performance implications before using a subquery for ordering.

Author: > What's the good alternative? To build a derived table and sort that?

A derived table might be better, I don't know. I think it's beyond the scope of this documentation -- not that I mind giving hints :smile: 

But sometimes instead of sorting by `a + b` maybe, if you know the structure of your data you can sort by `a, a + b` (if you know that `a` is always larger than `b`).

Or yeah, I would think that doing `.select((a, b) => (a, b, a+b).sortBy((a,b,c) => [(c, Order.ascending)])` might be better. In practice these cases are probably not common enough that we need to discuss them in the documentation.

We can use `.limit` and `.offset` to return a subset of rows from a query.
The following example builds on top of the previous example, sorting by
stock in descending order, skipping the first two rows and returning at-most 3
rows.

```dart bookstore_test.dart#query-orderby-offset
final result = await db.books
    .orderBy((b) => [(b.stock, Order.descending)])
    .select((b) => (b.title, b.stock))
    // The order in which .orderBy, .offset, .limit appears is significant.
    .offset(2)
    .limit(3)
    .fetch();

check(result).deepEquals([
  // title, stock
  ('Are Bunnies Unhealthy?', 10),
  ('Vegan Dining', 3),
  ('Cooking with Chocolate Eggs', 0),
]);
```

The equivalent SQL query would look something like:
```sql
SELECT
  title,
  stock
FROM books
ORDER BY stock DESC
OFFSET 2
LIMIT 3;
```

> [!WARNING]
> The **ordering** of `.orderBy`, `.offset` and `.limit` is significant.
> Meaning that `.limit(3).offset(3)` will _always_ result in an empty query!

You may apply `.limit` and `.offset` more than once, but they do stack on-top of
each other. So `.limit(3).limit(4)` will at-most return 3 rows, and
`.offset(2).offset(1)` will skip the first 3 rows.

> ## Point queries with `.byKey`, `.first` and `db.select()`

Reviewer: What's a "point query"?

Author: Generally, understood to be a lookup of a single point in a table, as opposed to a _range query_.

At-least gemini suggests that it's a reasonably well established term.
Though it does suggest that alternatives could be:
 * primary key lookup / unique key lookup
 * entity lookup

I don't know why I know the term :D

> If we want to lookup a row by _primary key_ `package:typed_sql` will generate
> a convenient `.byKey()` method. If we wanted to look up the row in books with
> `bookId = 1` we could simple write:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`package:typed_sql` generates
a `.byKey()` method convenient for looking up a row by _primary key_.

To look up the row in `books` with
`bookId = 1` write:
```

```dart bookstore_test.dart#books-bykey
final book = await db.books.byKey(bookId: 1).fetch();
if (book == null) {
  throw Exception('Book not found');
}

check(book.title).equals('Are Bunnies Unhealthy?');
```

> The astute reader might realize that unlike previous query examples `.fetch()`
> does not return a `Future<List<Book>>`. This is because `.byKey` returns a
> `QuerySingle<(Expr<Book>,)>`, meaning that the `.fetch()` extension method knows
> that the query returns _at-most one row_. Thus, `.fetch()` can simple return
> `Future<Book?>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike previous query examples `.fetch()`
does not return a `Future<List<Book>>`. This is because `.byKey` returns a
`QuerySingle<(Expr<Book>,)>`, a query type that is guaranteed to return _at-most one_ row. Thus, `.fetch()` simply returns `Future<Book?>`.
```

Author: I don't like the word "guaranteed", it's "defined as".

We can also get a `QuerySingle` using the `.first` extension method. This is

> useful if we want to query for rows by title, but we only one care about the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
useful if we only one care about the
```

first row. In practices, there are many scenarios where we know that there is
at-most one row, and using `.first` gives nicer typing.

```dart bookstore_test.dart#books-where-first
final book = await db.books
    .where((b) => b.title.equals(literal('Are Bunnies Unhealthy?')))
    .first
    .fetch();

if (book == null) {
  throw Exception('Book not found');
}
check(book.bookId).equals(1);
```

Often you'll want to lookup multiple point queries at the same time, this can
be easily done using `db.select`. This works the same as `.select` except, there
is only one result row, all values are `Expr` objects. Hence, we can lookup

> a book and an author in a single query performing two point queries at once:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a book and an author in a single query performing two point queries at once, saving a round-trip to the database:
```

```dart bookstore_test.dart#select-book-and-author
final (book, author) = await db.select((
  db.books.asSubQuery
      .where((b) => b.title.equals(literal('Are Bunnies Unhealthy?')))
      .first,
  db.authors.byKey(authorId: 1).asExpr,
)).fetchOrNulls();

if (book == null) {
  throw Exception('Book not found');
}
check(book.bookId).equals(1);
if (author == null) {
  throw Exception('Author not found');
}
check(author.name).equals('Easter Bunny');
```

Whenver, we have a `QuerySingle<(Expr<T>)>` consisting of a single value record,
we can convert it into a subquery using `.asExpr`. Similarly, whenever we have
a `Query<T>` we can convert it to a `SubQuery<T>` using `.asSubQuery`.
`SubQuery<T>` is not by itself magical, it's just that for convinience
`SubQuery<(Expr<T>,)>.first` returns `Expr<T?>`.

> [!TIP]
> Whether you use `.asExpr` or `.asSubQuery` doesn't matter, unless you're
> using _aggregate functions_ like `.count`, `.sum`, `.avg`, `.min`, and, `max`,

> > which on `SubQuery` returns `Expr<T>` as oppose to `.asExpr` which always

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> which on `SubQuery` returns `Expr<T>` as opposed to `.asExpr` which always
```

> gives you a nullable `Expr<T?>`.
>

> > See documentation for _aggregate functions_ for more details.

Reviewer: link?

    * `.add(Expr<T> other) -> Expr<T>` (also available as operator `+`)
    * `.subtract(Expr<T> other) -> Expr<T>` (also available as operator `-)
    * `.multiply(Expr<T> other) -> Expr<T>` (also available as operator `*`)
    * `.divide(Expr<T> other) -> Expr<T>` (also available as operator `/`)
    * `.asString() -> Expr<String>`
 * `Expr<int>`, has:
    * `.asDouble() -> Expr<double>`
 * `Expr<double>`, has:
    * `.asInt() -> Expr<int>`
 * `Expr<DateTime>`, has:
    * `.before(Expr<DateTime> other) -> Expr<bool>`
    * `.after(Expr<DateTime> other) -> Expr<bool>`

> [!NOTE]
> The reference above is not exhaustive, this is a quick reference, it'll not be
> updated for every new extension method introduced, though pull-requests to
> the documentation are appreciated.

The reference above, deliberately omits variations such as
`.<method>Literal(...)` and `.not<method>(...)` because they are merely
convinience functions.

## Query reference
The following is a high-level overview of the most important extension methods
for `Query` objects. In practice, you'll often discover these through
auto-completion, but it can be useful to know that if you use `.select` to

> select a single integer fields (or expression) such that you have

Reviewer: ```suggestion
select a single integer field (or expression) such that you have
```
